Brock welcome to Canada madam Jamis you
ladies and gentleman in America the
United States
thank you so much
thank you very much
thank you
thank you so much good evening Bonjour
mr. prime minister mr. speaker members
of the House members of the Senate
distinguished guests people of Canada
thank you for this extraordinary welcome
which tempts me to just shut up and
leave because I can't get any better
than this
obviously I'm grateful for the warm
welcome I'm extraordinarily grateful for
the close working relationship and
friendship with your outstanding Prime
Minister Justin Trudeau and his
extraordinary wife Sophie but I think
it's fair to say that much of this
greeting is simply a reflection of the
extraordinary alliance and deep
friendship between Canadians and
Americans Justin thank you for your very
kind words and for the new energy and
hope that your leadership has brought to
your nation as well as to the Alliance
my time in office may be nearing an end
but I know that Canada and the world
will benefit from your leadership and
from years to come
so Canada was the very first country
that I visited as president it was in
February it was colder I was younger
Michelle now refers to my hair as the
great white north and on that visit I
strolled around the Byward market tried
a beaver tail which is better than it
sounds
and I was struck then as I am again
today by the warmth of Canadians I could
not be more honored to be joining you in
this historic hall this Cathedral of
freedom and we Americans can never say
it enough we could not ask for a better
friend or ally than Canada
those true
and we do not take it for granted that
does not mean we don't have our
differences as I understand it one of
the reasons the Queen chose this site
for Parliament was that it was a safe
distance from America's border and I
admit in the war of 1812 American troops
did some damage to Toronto I suspect
that there were some people up here who
didn't mind when the British returned
the favor and burned down the White
House in more recent times however the
only forces crossing our borders are the
armies of tourists and business people
and families who are shopping and doing
business and visiting loved ones our
only battles take place inside the
hockey rink even there there's an uneasy
peace that is maintained as Americans we
to celebrate the life of mr. hockey
himself the late great Gordie Howe
just as Canadians come salute American
teams for winning more Stanley Cups in
the NHL
I told you I should have stopped
after the applause but in a world where
too many borders are a source of
conflict our two countries are joined by
the longest border of peace on earth and
what makes our relationships so unique
is not just proximity
it's our enduring commitment to a set of
values a spirit alluded to by Justin
that says no matter who we are where we
come from what our last names are what
faith we practice here we can make of
Our Lives what we will
it was the grid of pioneers and
prospectors who pushed west across a
forbidding frontier the dreams of
generations immigrants refugees that
were welcomed to these shores the hope
of runaway slaves who went north on the
Underground Railroad
deep in our history of struggle said dr.
Martin Luther King jr. Canada was the
North Star the freedom road links us
together we're bound as well by the
service of those who have defended us in
Flanders field the beaches of Normandy
the skies of the Balkans and more
recently in the mountains of Afghanistan
and training bases in Iraq and their
sacrifice is reflected in the silent
rows of Arlington and in the peace tower
above us and today we honor those who
gave their lives for all of us
we're linked together as well by the
institutions that we've built to keep
the peace the United Nations to advance
our collective aspirations a NATO
alliance to ensure our security NORAD
for Americans and Canadians stand watch
side by side and track sent on Christmas
Eve
we're linked by a vast web of Commerce
that carries goods from one end of this
continent to another and we're linked to
by the ties of friendship and family in
my case an outstanding brother-in-law
from Burlington how did you Burlington a
shout out our relationship is so
remarkable precisely because it seems so
unremarkable which is why Americans
often are surprised when our favorite
American actor or singer turns out to be
Canadian
the point is we see ourselves in each
other and our lives are Richard Ford as
president I've deepened the ties between
our countries and because of the
progress we've made in recent years I
can stand before you and say that the
enduring partnership between Canada and
the United States is as strong as it has
ever been and we are more closely
aligned than ever before
and yet we meet at a pivotal moment for
our Nations and for the globe from this
vibrant capital we can look upon a world
that has benefited enormously from the
international order that we help to
build together but we can see that same
order increasingly strained by the
accelerating forces of change the world
is by almost every measure less violent
than ever before but it remains Riven by
old divisions and fresh hatreds the
world's more connected than ever before
but even as it spreads knowledge and the
possibility of greater understanding
between peoples it also empowers
terrorists who spread hatred and death
most recently in Orlando and Istanbul
the world is more prosperous than ever
before but alongside globalization and
technological wonders we also see a rise
in inequality and wage stagnation across
the advanced economies leaving too many
workers and communities fearful of
diminishing prospects not just for
themselves but more importantly for
their children and in the face of such
rising uncertainty it is not enough to
look at aggregate growth rates or stock
prices or the pace of digital innovation
if the benefits of globalization accrue
only to those at the very top if our
democracies seem incapable of assuring
broad-based growth and opportunity for
everyone then people will push back out
of anger or out of fear and politicians
some sincere and some entirely sinner
will tap that anger and fear are coming
back to bygone days of order and
predictability at national glory arguing
that we must rebuild walls and disengage
from a chaotic
or read ourselves the supposed Ailes
brought on by immigrants all in order to
regain control of our lives we saw some
of these currents at work this past week
and the United Kingdom's referendum to
lead the European Union despite some of
the initial reactions I am confident
that the process can be managed in a
prudent orderly way I expect that our
friends on both sides of the channel
will develop a workable plan for how to
move forward and I'm equally confident
with transatlantic values that we all
share as liberal market-based
democracies are deeper and stronger than
any single event but while the
circumstances of brexit may be unique to
the United Kingdom
the frustrations people felt are not the
short-term follow-up of brexit can be
sensibly managed but the long-term
trends of inequality and dislocation and
the resulting social division those can
be ignored how we respond to the forces
of globalization and technological
change will determine the durability of
an international order that ensures
security and prosperity for future
generations
and fortunately the partnership between
the United States and Canada shows the
path we need to travel for our history
and our work together speak to a common
set of values to build on proven values
values that your Prime Minister spoke of
in his introduction values of pluralism
intolerance rule of law openness global
engagement in commerce and cooperation
coupled with equal opportunity and
investment in our people at home as
Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau once said
a country after all is not something you
as the pharaohs build the pyramids and
then leave standing there to defy
eternity a country is something that is
built every day out of certain basic
shared values what is true of countries
is true of the world and that's what I
want to talk about today how to
strengthen our institutions to advance
these commitments in a rapidly changing
world let me start with our shared
economic vision in all we do our
commitment to opportunity for all of our
people has to be at the centerpiece of
our work we are so fortunate because
both of our countries are so well
positioned to succeed in the 21st
century our two nations know firsthand
the awesome power of free markets and
innovation Canadians help some run some
of Silicon Valley's most innovative
companies our students study at each
other's world-class universities we
invest in research and development and
make decisions based on science and
evidence and it works
it's what's created these extraordinary
economies of ours but if the financial
crisis and recent recession taught us
anything it's that economies knew better
when everyone has a chance to succeed
for a long time it was thought that
countries have to choose between
economic growth or economic inclusion
but it turns out that's a false choice
if a CEO makes more in a day than a
typical employee makes in a year that
kind of inequality is not just bad for
morale in the company turns out is bad
for the economy that worker is not a
very good customer for business
if a young man if he obeyed in Ohio can
pay his student loans or a young woman
in Ontario can't pay her bills that has
ramifications for our economy it tamps
down the possibilities of growth so we
need growth that is broad and it lifts
everybody up including tax policies that
do right by working families and robust
safety nets for those who fall on hard
times as John Kenneth Galbraith once
said the common denominator of progress
is our people it's not numbers it's not
abstractions
how are people doing of course many who
share this progressive inclusive vision
can be heard now arguing that
investments in our people protections
for our workers fair tax policies these
things are not enough for them
globalization is inherently rigged
towards the top one percent and
therefore what's needed is an end to
trade agreements and various
international institutions and
arrangements that integrate national
economies and I understand that vision
III know why it's tempting it seems as
if if we draw a line around our borders
that will give us more control
particularly one the benefits of trade
and economic integration are sometimes
hard to see or easy to take for granted
and the very specific dislocations are
obvious and real there's just one
problem
restricting restricting trade or giving
in to protectionism in this 21st century
economy will not work it will not work
even if we wanted to we can't see
ourselves off from the rest of the world
the day after brexit people looked
around and said oh how's this going to
work the drag that economic weakness in
Europe and China and other countries is
having on our own economies right now
speaks to the degree to which we depend
our economies depend our jobs our
businesses depend on selling goods and
services around the world very few of
our domestic industries can sever what
is now truly a global supply chain and
so for those of us who truly believe
that our economies have to work for
everybody the answer is not to try and
pull back from our interconnected world
it is rather to engage with the rest of
the world to shape the rules so they're
good for our workers and good for our
businesses and the experience between
our two nations points the way the
United States and Canada have the
largest bilateral trade and investment
relationship in the world and we are
stronger for it means a company in
Quebec
it means a company in Quebec can create
jobs in North Carolina the startup in
Toronto can attract investment from
Texas now the problem is that some
economies in many of the fastest-growing
regions of the world particularly the
asia-pacific region don't always abide
by the same rules they impose unfair
tariffs or they suppress workers rights
or they maintain low environmental
standards that make it hard for our
businesses to compete fairly and with
the trans-pacific partnership we have
the ability to not only open up these
markets to US and Canadian products and
eliminate thousands of these unfair
tariffs which by the way we need to do
because they're already selling here
under existing rules but we're not
selling as much as we should over there
but it also affords us the opportunity
to increase protections for workers in
the environment and promote human rights
including strong prohibitions against
human trafficking and child labor and
that way our workers are competing on a
level playing field and our businesses
are less prone to pursue a race to the
bottom and when combined with increased
investments in our own people's
education and skills and training and
infrastructure and research and
development and connectivity then we can
spur the kind of sustained growth that
makes all of us better off
the point is we need to look forward not
look backward and more trade and more
people-to-people ties can also help
break down old divides I thank Canada
for its indispensable role in hosting
our negotiations with the Cuban
government and supporting our efforts to
set aside half a century of failed
policies to begin a new chapter with the
Cuban
I know a lot of Canadians like going to
Cuba maybe because they haven't had
Americans crime in the streets beaches
but that's changing and as more
Americans engage with the Cuban people
it will mean more economic opportunity
and more hope for ordinary Cubans we
also agree as Americans and Canadians
that wealthy countries like ours cannot
reach our full potential
while others remain mired in poverty
that too is not going to change in this
interconnected world that if there is
poverty and disease and conflict in
other parts of the world it spills over
as much as we'd like to pretend that we
can block it out so with our commitment
to new sustainable development goals we
have the chance to end the outrage of
extreme poverty we can bring more
you can bring more electricity to Africa
so the students can study at night
businesses can stay open we can banish
the scourge of malaria and Zika we can
realize our goal of the first aids-free
generation we can do that
let's relate our breasts and we can help
those who are working to replace
corruption with transparent accountable
institutions that serve their people as
leaders in global development the United
States and Canada understands that
development is not charity it's an
investment in our future prosperity
because not only do such investments and
policies help poor countries they're
going to create billions of customers
for US and Canadian products and they'll
make less likely the spread of deadly
epidemics to our shores and they'll
stabilize parts of the world that
threaten the security of our people in
fact both the United States and Canada
believe our own security and not just
prosperity is enhanced when we stand up
for the rights of all nations and
peoples to live in security and peace
and even as there are times when
unilateral action is necessary to defend
our people we believe that in a world
where wars between great powers are far
less likely but transnational threats
like terrorism and know no boundaries
our security is best advanced when
nations work together we believe the
disputes that do arise between nations
should be wherever possible resolve
peacefully with diplomacy that
international organizations should be
supported that multilateralism is not a
dirty word and certainly and certainly
we're more secure when we stand united
against terrorist networks and
ideologies that have reached to the very
doorstep of this Hall we honor all those
taken from us by violent extremists
including Canadians John Ridd sail and
Robert Hall
with Canada's additional contributions
including training Iraqi forces our
Coalition is on the offensive across
Iraq across Syria and we will destroy
the terrorist group ISIL we will
discover them
we'll continue helping local forces and
sharing intelligence from Afghanistan to
the Philippines so that we're pushing
back comprehensively against terrorist
networks and in contrast to the hatred
and the nihilism of terrorists we'll
work with partners around the world
including particularly Muslim
communities to offer a better vision and
a path of development and opportunity
and tolerance because they are and must
be our partners in this effort
meanwhile when nations violate
international rules and norms such as
Russia's aggression against Ukraine the
United States and Canada stand united
along with our allies in defense of our
collective security and doing so
requires a range of tools like economic
sanctions but it also requires that we
keep our forces ready for 21st century
missions and invest in new capabilities
and as your ally and as your friend let
me say that we'll be more secure when
every NATO member including Canada
contributes its full share to our common
security because
the Canadian Armed Forces are really
good and if I can borrow a phrase the
world needs more Canada
negative needs more Canada
just as we join together in our common
defense so must we work together
diplomatically particularly to avert war
and diplomacy results are rarely quick
but it turns out even the most
intractable conflicts can be resolved
here in our own hemisphere just in the
last few weeks after half a century of
war Columbia is poised to achieve a
historic peace and the nations of North
America the nations of North America
will be an important partner to Colombia
going forward including working to
remove landmines around the world
Canadian and American diplomats working
together can make a difference even in
Syria where the agony and the suffering
of the Syrian people tears at our hearts
our two nations continue to be leaders
in humanitarian aid to the Syrian people
and although a true resolution of this
conflict so far has eluded us we know
that the only solution to this civil war
is a political solution so that the
Syrian people can reclaim their country
and live in peace and Canadians and
Americans are going to work as hard as
we can to make that happen
I should have that here in the nation of
Lester Pearson we reaffirm our
commitment to keep strengthening the
peacekeeping that saves lives around the
world there's one threat however that we
cannot solve militarily nor can we solve
alone and that's the threat of climate
change now climate change is no longer
an abstraction it's not an issue we can
put off for the future it is happening
now it is happening here in our own
countries the United States and Canada
are both Arctic nations and last year
when I became the first u.s. president
to visit the Arctic I could see the
effects myself
glaciers my Canada's of the basket
glacier are melting at alarming rates
tundra is burning permafrost is thawing
this is not a conspiracy it's happening
within a generation Arctic sea ice may
all but disappear in the summer and so
sceptics and cynics can insist on
denying what's right in front of our
eyes but the Alaska Natives that I met
whose ancestral villages are sliding
into the sea they don't have that luxury
they know climate change is real they
know it is not a hoax and from
Bangladesh to the Pacific Islands rising
seas are swallowing land and forcing
people from their homes around the world
stronger storms and more intense
droughts will create humanitarian crises
and risk more conflict this is not just
a moral issue not just an economic issue
it is also an urgent matter of our
national security and for too long we've
heard that confronting climate change
means destroying our own economies but
let me just say carbon emissions in the
United States are back to where they
were two decades ago even as we've grown
our economy dramatically over the same
period Alberta
the oil country of Canada is working
hard to reduce emissions while still
promoting growth so if Canada can do it
and the United States can do it the
whole world can unleash economic growth
and protect our planet we can do this
we can do this we don't bleed the world
to meet this threat already together in
Paris we achieve the most ambitious
agreement in history to fight climate
change now let's bring it into force
this year with our with our agreement
with Mexico that we announced today
let's generate half the electricity on
this continent from clean energy sources
within a decade that's achievable
let's partner in the Arctic to help give
its people the opportunity they deserve
while conserving the only home they know
and building on the idea that began in
Montreal three decades ago let's finally
face down dangerous HFC greenhouse gases
this is the only planet we've got and
this may be the last shot we've got to
save it
and America and Canada are going to need
to lead the way we're gonna have to lead
the way
just as we're joined in our commitment
to protecting the planet we are also
joined in our commitment to the dignity
of every human being we believe in the
right of all people to participate in
society we believe in the right of all
people to be treated equally to have an
equal shot at success that is in our DNA
the basic premise of our democracies I
think we can all agree that our
democracies are far from perfect they
can be messy and they can be slow and
they can leave all sides of a debate
unsatisfied Justin is just getting
started
so in case you hadn't figured that out
that's where this gray hair comes from
but more than any other system of
government democracy allows our most
precious rights to find their fullest
expression enabling us through the hard
painstaking work of citizenship to
continually make our countries better to
solve new challenges to right past
wrongs and Prime Minister what a
powerful message of reconciliation it
was here and around the world when your
government pledged a new relationship
with Canada's First Nations
democracy is not easy it's hard living
up to our ideals can be difficult even
in the best of times and it can be
harder when the future seems uncertain
or when in response to legitimate fears
and frustrations there are those who
offer a politics of us versus them a
politics that scapegoats others the
immigrant the refugee someone who seems
different than us we have to call this
mentality what it is a threat to the
values that we profess the values we
seek to defend it's because we respect
all people that the world looks to us as
an example the colors of the rainbow
flag have flown on Parliament Hill they
have lit up the White House that is a
testament to our progress but also the
work that remains to ensure true
equality for our fellow citizens who are
lesbian gay bisexual or transgender
our Muslim friends and neighbors who run
businesses and serve in our governments
and in our armed forces and our friends
with our children and play on our sports
teams we've got to stand up against the
slander and the hate leveled against
those who look or worship differently
that's our obligation that's who we are
that's what makes America special that's
what makes Canada special here in Canada
here in Canada woman has already risen
to the highest office in the land in
America for the first time a woman is
the presumptive nominee of a major party
and perhaps I have a bias on these
issues but but our work won't be
finished until all women in our country
are truly paid equally treated equally
given the same opportunities as men when
our girls had the same
other bores that's
and let me say this because I don't feel
particularly politically correct on this
issue I don't believe that these are
American values or Canadian values or
Western values
I believe in Justin beliefs and I hope
all of you believe these are universal
values and we must be growing in their
defense at home and around the world and
not shy away from speaking up
tolerance and equality
I fear sometimes that we are timid in
defense of these these values that's why
I will continue to stand up for those
inalienable rights here in our own
hemisphere in places like Cuba and
Venezuela but also in more distant lands
for the rights of citizens and civil
society to speak their mind and work for
change for the rights of journalists to
report the truth for the rights of
people of all faiths to practice their
religion freely those things are hard
but they're right they're not always
convenient but they're true in the end
it is this respect for the dignity of
all people especially the most
vulnerable among us that perhaps more
than anything else binds our two
countries together being Canadian being
American is not about what we look like
or where our families came from it is
about our commitment to a common Creek
and that's why together we must not
waver in embracing our values our best
selves and that includes our history as
a nation of immigrants and we must
continue to welcome people from around
the world
the vibrancy of our economies are
enhanced by the addition of new striving
immigrants but this is not just a matter
of economics when refugees escape barrel
bombs and torture migrants cross deserts
and seas seeking a better life we cannot
simply look the other way we certainly
can't label as possible terrorists
vulnerable people who are fleeing
terrorism
we consume we can insist that the
process is orderly we can insist that
our security is preserved borders mean
something but at moments like this we
are called upon to see ourselves and
others because we were all once
strangers if you weren't a stranger your
grandparents were strangers your
great-grandparents were strangers they
didn't all have their papers ready they
fumbled with language face
discrimination had cultural norms that
didn't fit at some point somewhere your
family was an outsider and so the
mothers the father's the children we see
today they're us and we can't forsake
them so as Americans and Canadians we
will continue to welcome refugees and we
can ensure that we're doing so in a way
that maintains our security we can and
we will do both candidly we bought
we're increasing our support to Central
America so that fewer families and
children attempt the dangerous journey
north this fall the United Nations will
host a global summit on refugees because
in the face of this crisis more nations
need to step up and meet our basic
obligations to our fellow human beings
and it will be difficult and budgets are
tight and there are legitimate issues
and not everybody is going to be helped
but we can try people of goodwill and
compassion show us the way
greek islanders pulling families to
shore and germans handing out sweets to
migrants and railway stations a
synagogue in virginia inviting Syrian
refugees to dinner and here in Canada
the world has been inspired as Canadians
across this country it opened up their
hearts and their homes and we've watched
citizens knitting tooks to keep refugees
warm in the winter and we've seen your
Prime Minister welcomed new arrivals at
the airport and extend the hand of
Frenchmen and say you're safe at home
now and we see the refugees who feel
that they have a special duty to give
back and seize the opportunity of a new
life like the girl who fled Afghanistan
by donkey and camel and jet plane and
who remembers being greeted in this
country by helping hands and the sound
of Robin singing and today she serves in
this chamber and in the cabinet because
Canada is her home
a country is not something you build as
the pharaohs built the pyramids a
country is something that is built
everyday not a certain basic shared
values how that is how blessed we are to
have had people before us day by day
brick by brick build these extraordinary
countries of ours how fortunate how
privileged we are to have the
opportunity to now ourselves build this
world anew what a blessing and as we go
forward together on that Freedom Road
let's stay true to the values that make
us who we are Canadians and Americans
allies and friends now in forever thank
you very much